How to Install Marginalia for Moodle

Find the correct section below depending on whether you are installing 
Marginalia for the first time or upgrading to a new version of Marginalia.

If you upgrade to a new version of Moodle, upgrade Moodle first then follow the 
instructions for a fresh Marginalia install.


HOW TO INSTALL MARGINALIA THE FIRST TIME

These instructions apply if you do not already have Marginalia installed.  If
you're already running an older Marginalia release, skip to the next section
(HOW TO UPGRADE AN EXISTING MARGINALIA INSTALLATION).

The installation requires Moodle 2.0 or later.  An older release of Marginalia
does exist for Moodle 1.9.  It lacks some features an refinements introduced
since then.

Install Moodle *before* installing Marginalia.  If you patch Moodle before
running the Moodle installer, your Moodle istall may not run correctly.

The installation entails patching the Moodle code and running the Marginalia
installer within Moodle.  Note that the following instructiors are for UNIX-type
systems (e.g. Linux, Mac OS X).  I do not have instructions for installing on
Windows.

I recommend making a backup of your entire Moodle directory tree before 
performing the install.


STEP 0: Log-In To Moodle

Log into Moodle at least once to make sure it is working and let it do any
initial set-up it needs to.  Once you see the Moodle home page you should be
set.


STEP 1: Patch Moodle

The patch file will update existing files in your Moodle installation.  You
should do this from a clean Moodle install.  If you previously had an older
version of Marginalia installed, you will need to restore the Moodle files to 
their unpatched state before going ahead.  To apply the patch, copy moodle.patch
into your moodle root directory and run the following command:

    patch -b -p 1 <moodle2.patch
    
The digit after the -p is the number, not the letter L.  The -b option is not 
strictly necessary, but it makes it easier to (manually) uninstall Marginalia by 
keeping copies of unpatched files.

You should not see any errors.  However, the official release of Moodle is 
constantly changing, so there is a possibility that this patch will not match 
your Moodle version.  This does not happen very often, but if it does you may 
need to modify the source files by hand.

(This assumes you have the GNU patch utility.  You probably do:  Linux and OS X 
come with it, but a few UNIX systems use a non-GNU patch command.  GNU patch is 
free software and shouldn't be hard to find or set up.)


STEP 2: Copy Marginalia Files

Most of Marginalia is implemented as a kind of Moodle extension called a
"block."  You need to copy the block into the blocks directory of your Moodle
installation.  There are also other files that are needed for Marginalia to
function correctly (at this moment, there's just one - permalink.php).  Copy the 
contents of the moodle directory in the Marginalia release to the correct
locations under the root of your Moodle installation.  

When you're done, most of marginalia will be in blocks/marginalia under your
Moodle root.

Make sure to copy in mod/forum/permalink.php;  otherwise, links from the summary 
page back to individual forum posts will not work.
 
  
STEP 3:  Install the Database

Log in to Moodle as an administrator and visit the Notifications link in the 
Site Administration sidebar.  Moodle will then automatically create the 
necessary database tables for Marginalia


STEP 4:  Drop Us a Line

If you're using Marginalia please send a quick email to
support@webmarginalia.net.  It's nice to know that our work is appreciated.
It is also very valuable when requesting funding for improvements:  Marginalia 
was made possible by grants.  When we submit grant requests we tell how widely
the software is used.  Don't tell us more than you want to:  even saying "a
college with 3,000 students in Germany" is helpful.  We are not a commercial
operation.  We won't spread your contact info around or claim anything more
than that you are using the software (we won't misrepresent use as an official
endorsement either).  Seriously.  I (Geof) have put a lot of my own time into 
this simply because I want it to be useful.  Let me know :)


STEP 5:  Keep Copies of Marginalia and Moodle

Keep copies of the versions of Marginalia and Moodle you download.  If you 
upgrade to a new version of Moodle, you will need to install Marginalia again.  
If you upgrade to a new version of Marginalia, you may need your Moodle install 
files again.  You could always download new copies off the web, but using 
versions you know work could save you pain and suffering - or at least help you 
narrow down problems.


HOW TO UPGRADE AN EXISTING MARGINALIA INSTALLATION

These instructions are for upgrading from a previous version of Marginalia.
If you are upgrading your Moodle version, please see those instructions above.

Depending on which version you are upgrading from and to, the upgrade process
will be different.  Regardless, I recommend backing up your database and Moodle
directory just in case something goes wrong.

For must upgrades all you need to do is replace the blocks/marginalia directory 
with the new version and visit the Notifications link in the Site Administration 
sidebar within Moodle to update the database.

Sometimes, an upgrade may require you to patch Moodle again.  In that case, you
need to start with unpatched Moodle files (you can't apply a Marginalia
patch on top of an existing Marginalia patch).

To figure out the correct process, consult the following list.  If your current
Marginalia version is older than one of the versions on the list, and the
version you are upgrading to is on the list or is later than one of the versions
on the list, then you will need to install on a fresh copy of Moodle:

    April 2011

    
SPECIAL CASE: Pre-2009 Releases

If you are running a version of Marginalia from before December 2008 the process
is more involved.  You can tell that you have a pre-December 2008 release 
because Marginalia is not present in blocks/marginalia - instead it is in an
"annotation" directory under your Moodle root.  If you such an old version, it 
is essential you follow these steps before using marginalia or you may mangle 
your data.  After creating the database, as described above (by clicking on 
Notifications), you must log into MySQL and execute the following command:

    update mdl_block set version=2008101800 where name='marginalia';

Then, go back to Moodle and click on the Notifications link a second time.  
Marginalia should convert your existing annotations so that they
will work with the new software.  (As of December 2008, Marginalia uses a new
table in the database so your old annotation table will not be touched.  In a
pinch, you should be able to revert to an older Marginalia release without
having to restore the database.)


TEST MARGINILIA

You should now be able to connect to your Moodle web server as usual.  You 
should see an annotation margin if you visit a forum with posts while logged in.  
Select some text and in margin on the right to create annotations.  Reload the 
page:  your annotations should still be there.


INSTALLATION PROBLEMS

If you have problems (common symptoms are that you can create annotations but 
they disappear when you reload the page, or you can only create one annotation - 
subsequent attempts fail), it is probably because of a misconfiguration.  First, 
make sure that the URL through which you are accessing Moodle matches the one in 
config.php in your Moodle root directory.  If you are using a different 
url (e.g. localhost instead of a numerical IP address), annotation will not
work.

If your URL matches your configuration, I recommend installing and running 
the Firebug extension for Firefox.  Among other things, it tracks AJAX requests 
from a web page to the server.  The first thing to look for (other than any 
explicit errors reported by Firebug) is the GET requests sent to 
blocks/marginalia/annotate.php.  Looking at the server response often immediately 
reveals the problem (assuming PHP error reporting is on - something you must
enable in Moodle).

If you run into problems, please let me know.  I don't have the resources to
test on many configurations, so you're probably not the only one.  I can't fix
what I don't know about.  You can send reports to support@webmarginalia.net.


UNINSTALLING MARGINALIA

There is currently no automatic mechanism for uninstalling Marginalia.  The best
solution is to use a fresh Moodle install (it's always a good practice to keep a
copy of the version of Moodle you download).  In a pinch, the -b option to the
patch command you ran when you installed Marginalia creates files ending in 
.orig:  replacing patched files with these and removing the blocks/marginalia 
directory should disable Marginalia.
